Tekton Enhancement Proposals proposal 🤴 (#82)
tektoncd/community: teps/0001-tekton-enhancement-proposal-process.md

  to completion across one or more releases while stakeholders are
  adequately represented throughout the process

This process is supported by a unit of work called a Tekton
Enhancement Proposal or TEP.  A TEP attempts to combine aspects of a

- feature, and effort tracking document
- a product requirements document
- design document

into one file which is created incrementally in collaboration with one
or more Working Groups (WGs).

## Motivation

For cross project or new project proposal, an abstraction beyond a
single GitHub Issue semms to be required, in order to understand and
communicate upcoming changes to Tekton.

In a blog post describing the [road to Go 2][], Russ Cox explains

> that it is difficult but essential to describe the significance of a
> problem in a way that someone working in a different environment can
> understand

As a project it is vital to be able to track the chain of custody for
a proposed enhancement from conception through implementation.

Without a standardized mechanism for describing important enhancements
our talented technical writers and product managers struggle to weave
a coherent narrative explaining why a particular release is

> important. Additionally for critical infrastructure such as Tekton

Reviewer: ```suggestion
important. Additionally, for critical infrastructure such as Tekton,
```

adopters need a forward looking road map in order to plan their
adoption strategy.

> Before this proposal, there is not definite standard way and template

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before this proposal, there is not a standard way or template
```

> to create project enhancement or creation. We rely on different

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to create project enhancements. We rely on
```

> document hosted on Google docs, with not standard template explaining

Reviewer: ```suggestion
documents hosted on Google docs, without a standard template explaining
```

> why the change. Once a proposal is done, via a design docs, it tends

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the change. Once a proposal is done, via a design docs, it tends
```

> to be hard to follow what happens to it : updates on the proposal in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to be hard to follow what happens with the proposal: updates on the proposal in
```

reaction to comments, state of the proposal (when is it accepted, or
rejected).

The purpose of the TEP process is to reduce the amount of "tribal
knowledge" in our community. By moving decisions from a smattering of
mailing lists, video calls and hallway conversations into a well

> tracked artifact this process aims to enhance communication and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tracked artifact, this process aims to enhance communication and
```

discoverability.

A TEP is broken into sections which can be merged into source control
incrementally in order to support an iterative development process. An
important goal of the TEP process is ensuring that the process for
submitting the content contained in [design proposals][] is both clear
and efficient. The TEP process is intended to create high quality
uniform design and implementation documents for WGs to deliberate.

> [road to Go 2]: https://blog.golang.org/toward-go2 [design proposals]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/contributors/design-proposals

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[road to Go 2]: https://blog.golang.org/toward-go2) 
[design proposals]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/contributors/design-proposals
```

## Stewardship

> The following DACI model indentifies the responsible parties for TEPs.

Reviewer: Link to what DACI model is?

```suggestion
The following DACI model indentifies the responsible parties for TEPs:
```

**Workstream** | **Driver** | **Approver** | **Contributor** |
**Informed** --- | --- | --- | --- | ---
| TEP Process Stewardship | TG members | TG members | TG members | Community |
| Enhancement delivery | Enhancement Owner | SIG leadership (SIG Chairs + TLs) | Enhancement Implementer(s) (may overlap with Driver) | Community |

*TG members: Tekton Governing board members*

## Reference-level explanation

### What type of work should be tracked by a TEP

The definition of what constitutes an "enhancement" is a foundational
concern for the Tekton project. Roughly any Tekton user or

> operator facing enhancement should follow the TEP process: if an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
operator facing enhancement should follow the TEP process. If an
```

enhancement would be described in either written or verbal

> communication to anyone besides the TEP author or developer then

Reviewer: ```suggestion
communication to anyone besides the TEP author or developer, then
```

consider creating a TEP.

Similarly, any technical effort (refactoring, major architectural
change) that will impact a large section of the development community
should also be communicated widely. The TEP process is suited for this
even if it will have zero impact on the typical user or operator.

> As the local bodies of governance, WGs should have broad latitude in

Reviewer: Probably something different than `latitude` here? Maybe `reach`?

describing what constitutes an enhancement which should be tracked

> through the TEP process.  WGs may find that helpful to enumerate what

Reviewer: ```suggestion
through the TEP process. WGs may find it helpful to enumerate what
```

_does not_ require a TEP rather than what does. WGs also have the
freedom to customize the TEP template according to their WG specific

> concerns. For example the TEP template used to track API changes will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
concerns. For example, the TEP template used to track API changes will
```

likely have different subsections than the template for proposing
governance changes. However, as changes start impacting other WGs or

> the larger developer community outside of a WG, the TEP process

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the larger developer communities outside of a WG, the TEP process
```

should be used to coordinate and communicate.

Enhancements that have major impacts on multiple WGs should use the

> TEP process.  A single WG will own the TEP but it is expected that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TEP process. A single WG will own the TEP but it is expected that
```

> the set of approvers will span the impacted WGs.  The SEP process is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the set of approvers will span the impacted WGs. The SEP process is
```

the way that WGs can negotiate and communicate changes that cross
boundaries.

TEPs will also be used to drive large changes that will cut across all

> parts of the project.  These TEPs will be owned by SIG-architecture

Reviewer: ```suggestion
parts of the project. These TEPs will be owned by SIG-architecture
```

and should be seen as a way to communicate the most fundamental

> aspects of what Kubernetes is.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
aspects of what Tekton is.
```

### TEP Template

The template for a TEP is precisely defined

> [here](YYYYMMDD-tep-template.md**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[here](YYYYMMDD-tep-template.md)
```

**TO-DO***

### TEP Metadata

There is a place in each TEP for a YAML document that has standard

> metadata.  This will be used to support tooling around filtering and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
metadata. This will be used to support tooling around filtering and
```

> display.  It is also critical to clearly communicate the status of a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
display. It is also critical to clearly communicate the status of a
```

TEP.

Metadata items:
* **title** Required

>   * The title of the TEP in plain language.  The title will also be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * The title of the TEP in plain language. The title will also be
```

>     used in the TEP filename.  See the template for instructions and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    used in the TEP filename. See the template for instructions and
```

    details.
* **status** Required
  * The current state of the TEP.
  * Must be one of `provisional`, `implementable`, `implemented`,
    `deferred`, `rejected`, `withdrawn`, or `replaced`.
* **authors** Required

>   * A list of authors for the TEP.  This is simply the github ID.  In

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * A list of authors for the TEP. This is simply the github ID. In
```

  * If not yet chosen replace with `TBD`
  * Same name/contact scheme as `authors`
  * Reviewers should be a distinct set from authors.
* **approvers** Required
  * Approver(s) chosen after triage according to proposal process
  * Approver(s) are drawn from the different Tekton projects owners
  * The approvers are the individuals that make the call to move this
    TEP to the `implementable` state.
  * Approvers should be a distinct set from authors.
  * If not yet chosen replace with `TBD`
  * Same name/contact scheme as `authors`
* **editor** Required
  * Someone to keep things moving forward.
  * If not yet chosen replace with `TBD`
  * Same name/contact scheme as `authors`
* **creation-date** Required
  * The date that the TEP was first submitted in a PR.
  * In the form `yyyy-mm-dd`
  * While this info will also be in source control, it is helpful to
    have the set of TEP files stand on their own.
* **last-updated** Optional
  * The date that the TEP was last changed significantly.
  * In the form `yyyy-mm-dd`
* **see-also** Optional
  * A list of other TEPs that are relevant to this TEP.
  * In the form `TEP-123`
* **replaces** Optional

>   * A list of TEPs that this TEP replaces.  Those TEPs should list

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * A list of TEPs that this TEP replaces. Those TEPs should list
```

    this TEP in their `superseded-by`.
  * In the form `TEP-123`
* **superseded-by**
  * A list of TEPs that supersede this TEP. Use of this should be
    paired with this TEP moving into the `Replaced` status.
  * In the form `TEP-123`

### TEP Workflow

A TEP has the following states

- `provisional`: The TEP has been proposed and is actively being

>   defined.  This is the starting state while the TEP is being fleshed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  defined. This is the starting state while the TEP is being fleshed
```

  out and actively defined and discussed.
- `implementable`: The approvers have approved this TEP for
  implementation.
- `implemented`: The TEP has been implemented and is no longer
  actively changed.
- `deferred`: The TEP is proposed but not actively being worked on.
- `rejected`: The approvers and authors have decided that this TEP is

>   not moving forward.  The TEP is kept around as a historical

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  not moving forward. The TEP is kept around as a historical
```

  document.
- `withdrawn`: The TEP has been withdrawn by the authors.

> - `replaced`: The TEP has been replaced by a new TEP.  The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `replaced`: The TEP has been replaced by a new TEP. The
```

  `superseded-by` metadata value should point to the new TEP.

### Git and GitHub Implementation

TEPs are checked into the community repo under the `/teps`
directory.

New TEPs can be checked in with a file name in the form of

> `draft-YYYYMMDD-my-title.md`.  As significant work is done on the TEP

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`draft-YYYYMMDD-my-title.md`. As significant work is done on the TEP,
```

> the authors can assign a TEP number.  No other changes should be put

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the authors can assign a TEP number. No other changes should be put
```

in that PR so that it can be approved quickly and minimize merge

> conflicts.  The TEP number can also be done as part of the initial

Reviewer: ```suggestion
conflicts. The TEP number can also be done as part of the initial
```

submission if the PR is likely to be uncontested and merged quickly.

### TEP Editor Role

Taking a cue from the [Python PEP process][], we define the role of a

> TEP editor.  The job of an TEP editor is likely very similar to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TEP editor. The job of an TEP editor is likely very similar to the
```

[TEP editor responsibilities][] and will hopefully provide another
opportunity for people who do not write code daily to contribute to
Tekton.

In keeping with the TEP editors which

> Read the PEP to check if it is ready: sound and complete. The ideas
> must make technical sense, even if they don't seem likely to be
> accepted.  The title should accurately describe the content.  Edit
> the PEP for language (spelling, grammar, sentence structure, etc.),
> markup (for reST PEPs), code style (examples should match PEP 8 &
> 7).

TEP editors should generally not pass judgement on a TEP beyond

> editorial corrections.  TEP editors can also help inform authors about

Reviewer: ```suggestion
editorial corrections. TEP editors can also help inform authors about
```

- TEP rejection rate
- PRs referencing a TEP merged per week
- number of issues open which reference a TEP
- number of contributors who authored a TEP
- number of contributors who authored a TEP for the first time
- number of orphaned TEPs
- number of retired TEPs
- number of superseded TEPs

### Prior Art

The TEP process as proposed was essentially stolen from the
[Kubernetes KEP process][], which itself is essentially stolen from the [Rust RFC
process][] which itself seems to be very similar to the [Python PEP
process][]

[Rust RFC process]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs
[Kubernetes KEP process]: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps

## Drawbacks

Any additional process has the potential to engender resentment within
the community. There is also a risk that the TEP process as designed
will not sufficiently address the scaling challenges we face today. PR
review bandwidth is already at a premium and we may find that the TEP
process introduces an unreasonable bottleneck on our development
velocity.

It certainly can be argued that the lack of a dedicated issue/defect
tracker beyond GitHub issues contributes to our challenges in managing

> a project as large as Kubernetes, however, given that other large

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a project as large as Tekton, however, given that other large
```

Reviewer: My thought here was that it was a comparison to Kubernetes, but I think changing to Tekton makes sense too.

organizations, including GitHub itself, make effective use of GitHub

> issues perhaps the argument is overblown.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
issues, perhaps the argument is overblown.
```

The centrality of Git and GitHub within the TEP process also may place
too high a barrier to potential contributors, however, given that both
Git and GitHub are required to contribute code changes to Tekton today
perhaps it would be reasonable to invest in providing support to those
unfamiliar with this tooling. It also make the proposal document more
accessible that what it is before this proposal, as you are required
to be part of tekton-users@ or tekton-dev@ google groups to see the
design docs.

## Alternatives

This TEP process is related to
- the generation of a architectural roadmap
- the fact that the what constitutes a feature is still undefined
- issue management
- the difference between an accepted design and a proposal
- the organization of design proposals

> this proposal attempts to place these concerns within a general

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal attempts to place these concerns within a general
```

---
title: Tekton Enhancement Proposal Process
authors:
  - "@vdemeester"
editor: "@bobcatfish"
creation-date: 2020-03-10

> status: proposed

Author: Right now the status is `proposed`, meaning it is not accepted. We can merge a docs with this status, it means : "it has been proposed, it is not accepted yet, people are most likely working on it  to make it accepted".

> status: proposed

Author: > then you can't get comments on it (easily) anymore - do you keep this "proposed" until before you merge, and change it at that point?

Indeed you can't, but you can get proposed changes, discussion on the issue tracker — or even in the commit, … The idea though is that it received enough comments to be merged in its state and it's clear (on the merge) that works is going on on this proposal and a follow-up will come, soon.

---

# Tekton Enhancement Proposal Process

## Table of Contents

<!-- toc -->
- [Summary](#summary)
- [Motivation](#motivation)
- [Stewardship](#stewardship)
- [Reference-level explanation](#reference-level-explanation)
  - [What type of work should be tracked by a
    TEP](#what-type-of-work-should-be-tracked-by-a-tep)
  - [TEP Template](#tep-template)
  - [TEP Metadata](#tep-metadata)
  - [TEP Workflow](#tep-workflow)
  - [Git and GitHub Implementation](#git-and-github-implementation)
  - [TEP Editor Role](#tep-editor-role)
  - [Important Metrics](#important-metrics)
  - [Prior Art](#prior-art)
- [Drawbacks](#drawbacks)
- [Alternatives](#alternatives)

>   - [GitHub issues vs. TEPs](#github-issues-vs-keps)

Reviewer 3: This link is broken `keps` -> `teps` ?

- allow for the enumeration stability milestones and stability
  graduation criteria
- persist project information in a Version Control System (VCS) for
  future Tekton users and contributors
- support the creation of _high value user facing_ information such
  as:
  - an overall project development roadmap
  - motivation for impactful user facing changes
- reserve GitHub issues for tracking work in flight rather than
  creating "umbrella" issues
- ensure community participants are successfully able to drive changes
  to completion across one or more releases while stakeholders are
  adequately represented throughout the process

This process is supported by a unit of work called a Tekton
Enhancement Proposal (TEP). A TEP attempts to combine aspects of the following:

- feature, and effort tracking document
- a product requirements document
- design document

into one file which is created incrementally in collaboration with one
or more Working Groups (WGs).

## Motivation

For cross project or new project proposal, an abstraction beyond a
single GitHub issue seems to be required in order to understand and
communicate upcoming changes to the Tekton community.

> In a blog post describing the [road to Go 2][], Russ Cox explains

Author: The link is below  : https://github.com/tektoncd/community/pull/82/files#diff-0f1edbde54b3f99ced4e117be9e78806R106

> In a blog post describing the [road to Go 2][], Russ Cox explains

Reviewer 4: Do these links work? github preview can't seem to make sense of them:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/432502/80426361-892a5d80-88b3-11ea-991f-39a940099165.png)

> that it is difficult but essential to describe the significance of a
> problem in a way that someone working in a different environment can
> understand

As a project, it is vital to be able to track the chain of custody for
a proposed enhancement from conception through implementation.

Without a standardized mechanism for describing important enhancements,
our talented technical writers and product managers struggle to weave
a coherent narrative explaining why a particular release is
important. Additionally, for critical infrastructure such as Tekton,
adopters need a forward looking road map in order to plan their
adoption strategy.

Before this proposal, there is not a standard way or template
to create project enhancements. We rely on
documents hosted on Google docs, without a standard template explaining

> the change. Once a proposal is done, via a design docs, it tends

Author: good point, I should point to that in this doc :wink:

to be hard to follow what happens with the proposal: updates on the proposal in
reaction to comments, state of the proposal (when is it accepted, or
rejected).

The purpose of the TEP process is to reduce the amount of "tribal
knowledge" in our community. By moving decisions from a smattering of
mailing lists, video calls and hallway conversations into a well
tracked artifact, this process aims to enhance communication and

> discoverability.

Reviewer 4: I like most of this section but I feel myself feeling really defensive when I read this sentence "By moving decisions from a smattering of mailing lists, video calls and hallway conversations into a well tracked artifact", it just feels really pejorative toward the processes we've been using up until this point. Is there something different we can say that is maybe a bit more complimentary toward our existing processes (if they deserve it? i think they do! im proud of what we have done) - or maybe drop this sentence? (keeping the "tribal knowledge" sentence tho)

> discoverability.

Author: We can drop the sentence or write it better and keep "tribal knowledge" yes. I'll.. try to come with a better sentence :wink:. (sorry if it feels "very pejorative" :sweat_smile: it's not meant to be)

A TEP is broken into sections which can be merged into source control
incrementally in order to support an iterative development process. An
important goal of the TEP process is ensuring that the process for
submitting the content contained in [design proposals][] is both clear
and efficient. The TEP process is intended to create high quality
uniform design and implementation documents for WGs to deliberate.

[road to Go 2]: https://blog.golang.org/toward-go2) 
[design proposals]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/contributors/design-proposals

## Stewardship

> The following DACI model indentifies the responsible parties for TEPs:

Reviewer 4: link to what DACI is maybe? (https://www.productplan.com/glossary/daci/#:~:text=The%20DACI%20decision%2Dmaking%20framework%20is%20a%20model%20designed%20to,it%20comes%20to%20group%20decisions ?)

**Workstream** | **Driver** | **Approver** | **Contributor** |
**Informed** --- | --- | --- | --- | ---
| TEP Process Stewardship | TG members | TG members | TG members | Community |

> | Enhancement delivery | Enhancement Owner | SIG leadership (SIG Chairs + TLs) | Enhancement Implementer(s) (may overlap with Driver) | Community |

Reviewer 4: we dont really have SIGs, maybe we can replace this with OWNERS from each project?

Author: yeah, that's what I was going for :upside_down_face:

> *TG members: Tekton Governing board members*

Reviewer 4: i dont think this section is getting formatted the way you'd want it to:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/432502/76663019-1b6de080-6556-11ea-8c9f-1a12ab5ad56f.png)

Author: :man_facepalming:

## Reference-level explanation

> ### What type of work should be tracked by a TEP

Reviewer 5: It makes sense, but it feels like a lot of PRs would fit this.
Perhaps we could include a list of examples from past PRs of changes that would/would not qualify for a TEP?

Author: Adding some in the doc :angel: :+1:

The definition of what constitutes an "enhancement" is a foundational
concern for the Tekton project. Roughly any Tekton user or
operator facing enhancement should follow the TEP process. If an
enhancement would be described in either written or verbal
communication to anyone besides the TEP author or developer, then

> consider creating a TEP.

Reviewer 5: I don't think I fully understand the meaning of this?

Author: This means : if a proposal needs to be shared with more than just the developer (for different reason : cross-project, collaboration, user-facing), then it needs to have a TEP.

Similarly, any technical effort (refactoring, major architectural
change) that will impact a large section of the development community
should also be communicated widely. The TEP process is suited for this
even if it will have zero impact on the typical user or operator.

As the local bodies of governance, WGs should have broad latitude in
describing what constitutes an enhancement which should be tracked
through the TEP process. WGs may find it helpful to enumerate what
_does not_ require a TEP rather than what does. WGs also have the
freedom to customize the TEP template according to their WG specific

> concerns. For example, the TEP template used to track API changes will

Reviewer 5: We still might want to include a list of sections that *should* be adopted by all WGs

likely have different subsections than the template for proposing
governance changes. However, as changes start impacting other WGs or
the larger developer communities outside of a WG, the TEP process
should be used to coordinate and communicate.

Enhancements that have major impacts on multiple WGs should use the
TEP process. A single WG will own the TEP but it is expected that
the set of approvers will span the impacted WGs. The SEP process is
the way that WGs can negotiate and communicate changes that cross
boundaries.

TEPs will also be used to drive large changes that will cut across all

> parts of the project. These TEPs will be owned by SIG-architecture

Reviewer 5: ? 
We don't have a cross-project Tekton technical oversight body right? Do we need one?
Thinking about all cross-project type of activities:
- Infra like release, CI and CD can be supported by the Productivity WG. 
- Documentation is supported by the Docs WG. 
- API strategies and stability we have the Beta WG, which partly covers for that, and might evolve into an API WG once we reach beta. Or perhaps it will become a GA WG :)
- From the operational POV i.e. consistent install/upgrade, logging, monitoring across projects - which we don't have ATM, but that might also be covered by a dedicated WG if we feel the need for it.

Author: Indeed we don't. So far, if it's cross-project, my feeling was to use the *main* WG for this. But yeah, we might need to think more about that.

  implementation.
- `implemented`: The TEP has been implemented and is no longer
  actively changed.
- `deferred`: The TEP is proposed but not actively being worked on.
- `rejected`: The approvers and authors have decided that this TEP is
  not moving forward. The TEP is kept around as a historical
  document.
- `withdrawn`: The TEP has been withdrawn by the authors.
- `replaced`: The TEP has been replaced by a new TEP. The
  `superseded-by` metadata value should point to the new TEP.

### Git and GitHub Implementation

TEPs are checked into the community repo under the `/teps`
directory.

New TEPs can be checked in with a file name in the form of
`draft-YYYYMMDD-my-title.md`. As significant work is done on the TEP,
the authors can assign a TEP number. No other changes should be put
in that PR so that it can be approved quickly and minimize merge
conflicts. The TEP number can also be done as part of the initial
submission if the PR is likely to be uncontested and merged quickly.

### TEP Editor Role

Taking a cue from the [Python PEP process][], we define the role of a
TEP editor. The job of an TEP editor is likely very similar to the

> [TEP editor responsibilities][] and will hopefully provide another

Reviewer 4: links TBD i guess?

[Kubernetes KEP process]: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps

## Drawbacks

Any additional process has the potential to engender resentment within
the community. There is also a risk that the TEP process as designed
will not sufficiently address the scaling challenges we face today. PR
review bandwidth is already at a premium and we may find that the TEP
process introduces an unreasonable bottleneck on our development
velocity.

It certainly can be argued that the lack of a dedicated issue/defect
tracker beyond GitHub issues contributes to our challenges in managing
a project as large as Tekton, however, given that other large
organizations, including GitHub itself, make effective use of GitHub
issues, perhaps the argument is overblown.

The centrality of Git and GitHub within the TEP process also may place
too high a barrier to potential contributors, however, given that both
Git and GitHub are required to contribute code changes to Tekton today
perhaps it would be reasonable to invest in providing support to those
unfamiliar with this tooling. It also make the proposal document more
accessible that what it is before this proposal, as you are required

> to be part of tekton-users@ or tekton-dev@ google groups to see the

Reviewer 4: maybe link to community docs re. mailing lists

  future Tekton users and contributors
- support the creation of _high value user facing_ information such
  as:
  - an overall project development roadmap
  - motivation for impactful user facing changes
- ensure community participants are successfully able to drive changes
  to completion across one or more releases while stakeholders are
  adequately represented throughout the process

This process is supported by a unit of work called a Tekton
Enhancement Proposal (TEP). A TEP attempts to combine aspects of the
following:

- feature, and effort tracking document
- a product requirements document
- design document

into one file which is created incrementally in collaboration with one
or more [Working
Groups](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/master/working-groups.md)
(WGs).

This process does not block authors from doing early design docs using
any means. It does not block authors from sharing those design docs
with the community (during Working groups, on Slack, GitHub, …).

**This process acts as a requirement when a design docs is ready to be
implemented or integrated in the `tektoncd` projects**. In other words,

> a change that impact other `tektoncd` projects or users cannot be

Reviewer 4: tiny typo: impact -> impacts

struggle to weave a coherent narrative explaining why a particular
release is important. Additionally, for critical infrastructure such
as Tekton, adopters need a forward looking road map in order to plan
their adoption strategy.

Before this proposal, there is not a standard way or template to
create project enhancements, but
[suggestions](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/master/process.md#proposing-features)
on proposing a feature. We rely on documents hosted on Google docs,
without a standard template explaining the change. Once a proposal is
done, via a design docs, it tends to be hard to follow what happens
with the proposal: updates on the proposal in reaction to comments,
state of the proposal (when is it accepted, or rejected).

The purpose of the TEP process is to reduce the amount of "tribal
knowledge" in our community. This is done by putting in place a gate
(submitting and getting a TEP merged) that mark a decision after
having discussed the subject during video calls, on mailing list and
other means. This process aims to enhance communication and
discoverability. The TEP process is intended to create high quality

> uniform design and implementation documents for WGs to deliberate.

Reviewer 4: thanks for iterating on this paragraph and the last! looks good to me :)

- Expose v1beta1 to the world ⛈ [tektoncd/pipeline#2035](https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/issues/2035)
- Initial Implementation of conditionals [tektoncd/pipeline#1093](https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/issues/1093)
- Adding new ways to resolve Task/Pipeline definition, using OCI
  images or other means ([tektoncd/pipeline#2298](https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/issues/2298),
  [tektoncd/pipeline#1839](https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/issues/1839))
- Improve UX of getting credentials into Tasks ([tektoncd/pipeline#2343](https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/issues/2343))

Let's also list some changes or features that are not yet in progress
and could benefit from a TEP:

- Pipeline Resources re-design, a.k.a. bring `PipelineResource` to
  v1beta1
- Bring `Conditions` to `v1beta1` or rewrite them differently
- Automated releases across projects
- CI setup using Tekton on Tekton (aka the /dogfooding/ project)
- Serving new API version (v1beta2, v1, …) on `tektoncd/pipeline`
- Beta APIs on `tektoncd/triggers`
- Local-to-Tekton feature on `tektoncd/cli` (aka use local source to
  execute a Pipeline in the cluster)

> 

Reviewer 4: what do you think about including examples of things that would NOT require a TEP, to give an idea of where the line is?

i'm guessing theses would NOT need TEPs:
- Propagate annotations from Conditions to TaskRuns/Pods: https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/pull/2608
- Improvments on Pipeline cancel https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/pull/2543

I'm not quite sure about these, I kinda hope they wouldnt need TEPs:
- Add variable substitution for PVC name: https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/pull/2506
- Emit events when we fail to update the taskrun https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/pull/2526

I _could_ imagine requiring TEPs for the last 2, but I feel like that might be more work than it's worth? Maybe if you can describe the problem and solution in the description of a GitHub issue, that's an indication a TEP is not required? Maybe TEPs are for the sort of features that we'd be asking for design docs for?

Author: > Maybe TEPs are for the sort of features that we'd be asking for design docs for?

In a gist, yes :wink:

* **authors** Required
  * A list of authors for the TEP. This is simply the github ID. In
    the future we may enhance this to include other types of
    identification.
* **creation-date** Required
  * The date that the TEP was first submitted in a PR.
  * In the form `yyyy-mm-dd`
  * While this info will also be in source control, it is helpful to
    have the set of TEP files stand on their own.
* **last-updated** Optional
  * The date that the TEP was last changed significantly.
  * In the form `yyyy-mm-dd`
* **see-also** Optional
  * A list of other TEPs that are relevant to this TEP.
  * In the form `TEP-123`
* **replaces** Optional
  * A list of TEPs that this TEP replaces. Those TEPs should list
    this TEP in their `superseded-by`.
  * In the form `TEP-123`
* **superseded-by** Optional
  * A list of TEPs that supersede this TEP. Use of this should be
    paired with this TEP moving into the `Replaced` status.
  * In the form `TEP-123`

### TEP Workflow

A TEP has the following states

- `proposed`: The TEP has been proposed and is actively being
  defined. This is the starting state while the TEP is being fleshed
  out and actively defined and discussed.

> - `implementable`: The approvers have approved this TEP for

Author: I'm ok with both :upside_down_face:

     applies). A name is choosed for those : Tekton Bundles.
   - Create a new TEP on implementing Tekton Bundles in tektoncd
     projects (`pipeline` and `cli`)
5. The current TEP, defining the spec, is *approved* and marked as
   `implemented`. In this case `implemented` means it is available in
   the documentation in `tektoncd` (most likely on the
   `tektoncd/pipeline` repository)

We are now switching to the "Implementing Tekton Bundles" TEP.

1. It is proposed based on a design docs (discussed during working
   group)
2. It depends on the TEP on support for referencing Task and Pipeline
   to be approved and in the `implementable` (aka we have agreed on
   how it should be implemented more or less 😝).
   It is also agreed (and most likely written in the TEP) that
   "Implementing Tekton Bundle" would serve as the first
   implementation of this TEP.
3. The "Implementing Tekton Bundle" gets approved, and as it has been
   discussed during working groups, it is ready for implementation, so
   it gets merged directly into `implementable`.
4. Work is happening in `tektoncd/pipeline` (and `tektoncd/cli` in
   parallel) on implementing it.

> 5. Implementation is done, we update the TEP to put it in

Author: They should only be immutable once `implemented`.

> 5. Implementation is done, we update the TEP to put it in

Author: (in `TEP Workflow`, the only state marked as *read-only* is implemented :wink: )

   The next action are:
   - Mark this TEP as withdrawn, we acknoledge it is not the way to
     go. When marking this as `withdrawn`, add the reason why.
   - Conduct experiment on not using PipelineResource
   - Act that the `PipelineResource` needs a full re-design (and thus
     removing it from the beta API for now)
4. From the conducted experiment on "a life without PipelineResource",
   two concept are being discussed:
   - Workspace : to share data between tasks
   - Results : to share results between tasks

   A TEP for each is created, approved and implemented.
5. Design discussion and docs are being created to re-design
   PipelineResources using the above new concept. It gets discussed in
   different working group.
   A TEP is created to act that design work is going on on the
   subject. The TEP is marked as `proposed`.
6. A design is agreed after working group discussions, this new TEP
   gets updated, and is marked as `implementable`.
7. Work can start on the new `PipelineResource` design
8. Once the work around this is done, the TEP gets updated to
   `implemented` state.

Later, some enhancement to the `PipelineResource` are proposed. Those

> will result in new `TEP`s.

Reviewer 4: this process sounds pretty reasonable to me! curious about @sbwsg 's thoughts

## Drawbacks

Any additional process has the potential to engender resentment within
the community. There is also a risk that the TEP process as designed
will not sufficiently address the scaling challenges we face today. PR
review bandwidth is already at a premium and we may find that the TEP
process introduces an unreasonable bottleneck on our development
velocity.

> The centrality of Git and GitHub within the TEP process also may place

Reviewer 5: Ditto - do we have a strong dep to GitHub in this process? 
From a discoverability POV we could publish TEPs and their status and related artifacts on tekton website or on a dedicated website teps.tekton.dev -  setting that up could be TEP#2 :)

Author: We definitely should, and yes, I would see that as a TEP#2 (or another number if any TEPs is approved before that :P)

too high a barrier to potential contributors, however, given that both
Git and GitHub are required to contribute code changes to Tekton today
perhaps it would be reasonable to invest in providing support to those
unfamiliar with this tooling. It also make the proposal document more
accessible that what it is before this proposal, as you are required
to be part of
[tekton-users@](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/tekton-users)
or [tekton-dev@](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/tekton-dev)
google groups to see the design docs.

> ## Unresolved Questions

Reviewer 5: Since this is a TEP itself, it may be a good learning exercise for these.
We can update them until incrementally until the TEP gets to approved.

  changes to Tekton
- ensure that the motivation for a change is clear
- allow for the enumeration stability milestones and stability
  graduation criteria
- persist project information in a Version Control System (VCS) for
  future Tekton users and contributors
- support the creation of _high value user facing_ information such
  as:
  - an overall project development roadmap
  - motivation for impactful user facing changes
- ensure community participants are successfully able to drive changes
  to completion across one or more releases while stakeholders are
  adequately represented throughout the process

This process is supported by a unit of work called a Tekton
Enhancement Proposal (TEP). A TEP attempts to combine aspects of the
following:

- feature, and effort tracking document
- a product requirements document
- design document

into one file which is created incrementally in collaboration with one
or more [Working
Groups](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/master/working-groups.md)
(WGs).

This process does not block authors from doing early design docs using
any means. It does not block authors from sharing those design docs

> with the community (during Working groups, on Slack, GitHub, …**.

Reviewer 4: 👍

Author: oh there is a typo though :thinking: `**` instead of `)`..

**This process acts as a requirement when a design docs is ready to be
implemented or integrated in the `tektoncd` projects**. In other words,
a change that impact other `tektoncd` projects or users cannot be

> merged if there is no `TEP` associated with it.

Reviewer 4: i think we might need to define a bit better what "impact on other projects or users" means, since every change we make that's not refactoring or tests will affect users to some extent. (we can rule out most bugs maybe?)

Author: yep, we can rule out all the bugs really :wink: I'll add some examples.

Without a standardized mechanism for describing important
enhancements, our talented technical writers and product managers
struggle to weave a coherent narrative explaining why a particular
release is important. Additionally, for critical infrastructure such
as Tekton, adopters need a forward looking road map in order to plan
their adoption strategy.

Before this proposal, there is not a standard way or template to
create project enhancements, but
[suggestions](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/master/process.md#proposing-features)
on proposing a feature. We rely on documents hosted on Google docs,
without a standard template explaining the change. Once a proposal is
done, via a design docs, it tends to be hard to follow what happens
with the proposal: updates on the proposal in reaction to comments,
state of the proposal (when is it accepted, or rejected).

The purpose of the TEP process is to reduce the amount of "tribal
knowledge" in our community. By moving decisions from a smattering of
mailing lists, video calls and hallway conversations into a well
tracked artifact, this process aims to enhance communication and
discoverability.

> A TEP is broken into sections which can be merged into source control

Reviewer 4: i'm confused by what this means about sections which can be merged incrementally, could we link to the relevant section that explains that maybe?

Author: Right, I need to work on the template then :sweat_smile: In my head, part of the template **has to be** there for the initial merge of the proposal (while we keep discussing details during WGs), the rest can be completed later on (when we reached a decision).

project owners acknowledge this is something we need to work on *but*
the proposal needs to be more detailed before we can go ahead and
implement it in the main project(s). This state doesn't prevent using
`tektoncd/experimental` to *experiment* and gather feedback.

A TEP can be created with the `implementable` state if it doesn't need
any more discussion and got approved as it.

See [Examples](#examples) to see examples of TEP workflow on use cases.

### Git and GitHub Implementation

TEPs are checked into the community repo under the `/teps` directory.

New TEPs can be checked in with a file name in the form of
`draft-YYYYMMDD-my-title.md`. As significant work is done on the TEP,
the authors can assign a TEP number. No other changes should be put in
that PR so that it can be approved quickly and minimize merge
conflicts. The TEP number can also be done as part of the initial
submission if the PR is likely to be uncontested and merged quickly.

### Prior Art

The TEP process as proposed was essentially stolen from the
[Kubernetes KEP process][], which itself is essentially stolen from the [Rust RFC
process][] which itself seems to be very similar to the [Python PEP

> process][]

Reviewer 4: i think the python link is missing

Author: oh.. where did it go :scream_cat:

[Rust RFC process]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs
[Kubernetes KEP process]: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps

## Examples

Let's give some example of workflow to give reader a better
understanding on how and when TEP should be created and how they are
managed across time.

Those are examples, and do not necessarily reflect what happened, or
will happens on the particular subject they are about. They are here
to give more context and ideas on different situation that could rise
while following the TEP process.

### Share Task and Pipeline as OCI artifact

For more context, this is linked to the following:

- [Feature: Versioning on Tasks/Pipelines](https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/issues/1839)
- [Oci tool: makes use of oci-artifacts to store and retrieve Tekton resources](https://github.com/tektoncd/experimental/pull/461)

> 1. An initial design doc is crafted (let's imaging it is [Tekton OCI

Reviewer 4: typo -> imagine

Image
Catalog](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1zUVrIbGZh2R9dawKQ9Hm1Cx3GevKIfOcRO3fFLdmBDc/edit#heading=h.tp9mko2koenr)).
   An experimental project has already been created and a
   proof-of-concept demoed during a working group. The next step is to
   create a TEP (and continue work on the proof-of-concept if need be).
2. From this design docs, a TEP is created with the content of the
   design document.
3. It is approved with a `proposed` state, which means :
   - We acknowledge this is important for the project, and needs to be
     worked on
   - It needs some work and discussion based on the initial proposal
4. The TEP is being disscussed during Working Group(s) — it can be the
   main one, a specific one, the API Working Group.

   During those discussion it is clear that some work needs to be
   done:
   - Define a Spec for the OCI image (layers, metadata, configuration)
     The experimental project can be used to demo and validate that spec.

>    - Once the spec is agreed one

Reviewer 4: typo -> on

   - Have a new TEP to add support for referencing Task and Pipeline
     through alternative means than in clusters (OCI image is one,
     using Git or an HTTP url are others)

   The next action are :
   - Create a new TEP on support for referencing Task and Pipeline.
     As before, the TEP can be first discussed during Working group
     and refined in Google Docs before being proposed as a TEP.
   - Update the current TEP to define the spec (same thing as above
     applies). A name is choosed for those : Tekton Bundles.
   - Create a new TEP on implementing Tekton Bundles in tektoncd

>      projects (`pipeline` and `cli`)

Reviewer 4: whats the difference between this TEP and the one that defines the spec?

Author: I just felt it would be clearer to split the two : one that describe the spec (and only focus on the spec), and one that describe the use/implementation/integration of it in the tekton project.

Reviewer 4: I agree with @afrittoli - we could always start with fewer TEPs required (since we have 0 right now) and expand it as needed

Author: @afrittoli there would be two TEPs (and one deprecated/taken over). Again, this is just an "example" of what could have happened. We can also rename the initial TEP, reducing its scope, etc…

Reviewer 4: i still feel like one TEP could have accomplished what seems to require 2-3 TEPs above

> Again, this is just an "example" of what could have happened. 

I'm tempted to agree with you that this is just an example and leave it as is, however it seems like ppl will want to refer to these examples as references for what they should be doing so it might be worth getting some agreement on what this ideally would look like.

I don't want to block this proposal from getting merged tho: would it make sense to merge it, maybe even without this section, and continue to discuss, e.g. in the governing board meeting or tekton working group?

or alternatively just stick with the pipelineresources example only? in that example i find it easier to follow why we end up with multiple TEPs

Author: Ok, I'll simplify this one :wink:

5. The current TEP, defining the spec, is *approved* and marked as
   `implemented`. In this case `implemented` means it is available in
   the documentation in `tektoncd` (most likely on the

>    `tektoncd/pipeline` repository)

Reviewer 4: im a bit confused by this - we've still only got TEPs at this point right, no code?

Author: > im a bit confused by this - we've still only got TEPs at this point right, no code?

So you have code in `tektoncd/experimental` at this point, you can have code in a fork, or even in a `WIP` PR even ; you just don't have code **merged** into the *non-experimental* repositories (`pipeline`, `cli`, …). But this is about the `spec` TEP, which.. doesn't really need code to be considered as implemented, the "output" of defining a spec is the spec itself (which you could consider as code)

   different working group.
   A TEP is created to act that design work is going on on the
   subject. The TEP is marked as `proposed`.
6. A design is agreed after working group discussions, this new TEP
   gets updated, and is marked as `implementable`.
7. Work can start on the new `PipelineResource` design
8. Once the work around this is done, the TEP gets updated to
   `implemented` state.

Later, some enhancement to the `PipelineResource` are proposed. Those
will result in new `TEP`s.

## Drawbacks

Any additional process has the potential to engender resentment within
the community. There is also a risk that the TEP process as designed
will not sufficiently address the scaling challenges we face today. PR
review bandwidth is already at a premium and we may find that the TEP
process introduces an unreasonable bottleneck on our development
velocity.

It certainly can be argued that the lack of a dedicated issue/defect
tracker beyond GitHub issues contributes to our challenges in managing
a project as large as Tekton, however, given that other large
organizations, including GitHub itself, make effective use of GitHub

> issues, perhaps the argument is overblown.

Reviewer 4: do we need this paragraph and the one above? i think they're just copied from the original, im not really sure they add much here

Author: We can remove them yeah :wink:

The centrality of Git and GitHub within the TEP process also may place
too high a barrier to potential contributors, however, given that both
Git and GitHub are required to contribute code changes to Tekton today
perhaps it would be reasonable to invest in providing support to those
unfamiliar with this tooling. It also make the proposal document more
accessible that what it is before this proposal, as you are required
to be part of
[tekton-users@](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/tekton-users)
or [tekton-dev@](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/tekton-dev)
google groups to see the design docs.

## Alternatives

This TEP process is related to

> - the generation of a architectural roadmap

Reviewer 4: typo -> an

- the fact that the what constitutes a feature is still undefined
- issue management
- the difference between an accepted design and a proposal
- the organization of design proposals

This proposal attempts to place these concerns within a general

> framework.

Reviewer 4: i dont really understand this section - do we want to add more detail to flesh out the above points?

i also thought this section might touch on some of the alternatives we discussed but it doesnt seem to have any alternatives?

Author: right, I need to rework that one

  adequately represented throughout the process

This process is supported by a unit of work called a Tekton
Enhancement Proposal (TEP). A TEP attempts to combine aspects of the
following:

- feature, and effort tracking document
- a product requirements document
- design document

into one file which is created incrementally in collaboration with one
or more [Working
Groups](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/master/working-groups.md)
(WGs).

This process does not block authors from doing early design docs using
any means. It does not block authors from sharing those design docs
with the community (during Working groups, on Slack, GitHub, …).

**This process acts as a requirement when a design docs is ready to be
implemented or integrated in the `tektoncd` projects**. In other words,
a change that impacts other `tektoncd` projects or users cannot be
merged if there is no `TEP` associated with it. Bug fixes and small
changes like refactoring that do not affect the APIs (CRDs, REST APIs)
are not concerned by this. Fixing the behaviour of a malfunctioning
part of the project does not require a TEP.

This TEP process is related to
- the generation of an architectural roadmap

> - the fact that the what constitutes a feature is still undefined

Reviewer 6: This wording seems off. Maybe something like "the fact that the proposed feature is still undefined"

their adoption strategy.

Before this proposal, there is not a standard way or template to
create project enhancements, but
[suggestions](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/master/process.md#proposing-features)
on proposing a feature. We rely on documents hosted on Google docs,
without a standard template explaining the change. Once a proposal is
done, via a design docs, it tends to be hard to follow what happens
with the proposal: updates on the proposal in reaction to comments,
state of the proposal (when is it accepted, or rejected).

The purpose of the TEP process is to reduce the amount of "tribal
knowledge" in our community. This is done by putting in place a gate
(submitting and getting a TEP merged) that mark a decision after
having discussed the subject during video calls, on mailing list and
other means. This process aims to enhance communication and
discoverability. The TEP process is intended to create high quality
uniform design and implementation documents for WGs to deliberate.

A TEP is broken into sections which can be merged into source control
incrementally in order to support an iterative development process. A

> number of section are required for a TEP to get merged in the

Reviewer 6: Should be "sections"

`proposed` state (see the different states in the [TEP

> Metadata](#tep-metadata)). The rest of the section can be updated once

Reviewer 6: This last sentence is a bit awkward. Maybe something like "The other sections can be updated after further discussions and agreement from the Working Groups."

being discussed more during Working Groups and agreed on.

[road to Go 2]: https://blog.golang.org/toward-go2

## Stewardship

The following
[DACI](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Responsibility_assignment_matrix#DACI)
model indentifies the responsible parties for TEPs:

| **Workstream**          | **Driver**          | **Approver**             | **Contributor**                                      | **Informed** |
| ---                     | ---                 | ---                      | ---                                                  | ---          |
| TEP Process Stewardship | Tekton Contributors | Tekton Governing members | Tekton Contributors                                  | Community    |

> | Enhancement delivery    | Enhancement Owner   | Project(s) OWNERs        | Enhancement Implementer(s) (may overlap with Driver) | Community    |

Reviewer 6: "Project(s) OWNERs" should change the capitalization to "Project(s) Owners"

In a nutshell, this means:
- Updates on the TEP process are driven by contributors and approved
  by the tekton governing board.
- Enhancement proposal are driven by contributors, and approved by the
  related project(s) owners.

## Reference-level explanation

### What type of work should be tracked by a TEP

The definition of what constitutes an "enhancement" is a foundational
concern for the Tekton project. Roughly any Tekton user or operator
facing enhancement should follow the TEP process. If an enhancement
would be described in either written or verbal communication to anyone
besides the TEP author or developer, then consider creating a
TEP. This means any change that may impact any other community project
in a way should be proposed as a TEP. Those changes can be for

> technical reason, adding or removing (deprecating then removing)

Reviewer 6: Maybe reword this last sentence. Something like: Those changes could be for technical reasons, or adding new features, or deprecating then removing old features.

  * In the form `TEP-123`
* **replaces** Optional
  * A list of TEPs that this TEP replaces. Those TEPs should list
    this TEP in their `superseded-by`.
  * In the form `TEP-123`
* **superseded-by** Optional
  * A list of TEPs that supersede this TEP. Use of this should be
    paired with this TEP moving into the `Replaced` status.
  * In the form `TEP-123`

### TEP Workflow

A TEP has the following states

- `proposed`: The TEP has been proposed and is actively being
  defined. This is the starting state while the TEP is being fleshed
  out and actively defined and discussed.
- `implementable`: The approvers have approved this TEP for
  implementation.
- `implemented`: The TEP has been implemented and is no longer
  actively changed. From that point on, the TEP should be considered
  *read-only*.
- `withdrawn`: The TEP has been withdrawn by the authors or by the
  community on agreement with the authors.
- `replaced`: The TEP has been replaced by a new TEP. The
  `superseded-by` metadata value should point to the new TEP.

When a TEP is merged with the `proposed` state, this means the
project owners acknowledge this is something we need to work on *but*

> the proposal needs to be more detailed before we can go ahead and

Reviewer 6: It's not just that the proposal needs more details (the proposal might actually not ever change) but we might need more information about the impact on users, or some time to socialize it with other WGs, etc.

implement it in the main project(s). This state doesn't prevent using
`tektoncd/experimental` to *experiment* and gather feedback.

> A TEP can be created with the `implementable` state if it doesn't need

Reviewer 6: NIT: Maybe reword to something like: A TEP can be moved to the `implementable` state if it doesn't need any more discussion and is approved as is.

any more discussion and got approved as it.

See [Examples](#examples) to see examples of TEP workflow on use cases.

### Git Implementation

TEPs are checked into the community repo under the `/teps` directory.

New TEPs can be checked in with a file name in the form of
`draft-YYYYMMDD-my-title.md`. As significant work is done on the TEP,
the authors can assign a TEP number. No other changes should be put in
that PR so that it can be approved quickly and minimize merge
conflicts. The TEP number can also be done as part of the initial
submission if the PR is likely to be uncontested and merged quickly.

### Prior Art

The TEP process as proposed was essentially adapted from the

> [Kubernetes KEP process][], which itself is essentially stolen from the [Rust RFC

Reviewer 7: Does this process apply to all Tekton projects in addition to Pipelines like CLI, triggers, dashboard? if so, should we store TEPs in a project specific directories like KEP?

Author: It applies to all tekton project, but so far, trying to keep it simple and have it all on the same folder. 
1. We may have a lot of TEP that touch more than one project
2. We are not as big as kubernetes :stuck_out_tongue_closed_eyes: 

We'll see over time if we need to have subfolders, etc..

process][] which itself seems to be very similar to the [Python PEP
process][]

[Rust RFC process]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs
[Kubernetes KEP process]: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps
[Python PEP process]: https://www.python.org/dev/peps/

## Examples

> Let's give some example of workflow to give reader a better

Reviewer 6: NIT: change "give reader" to "give the reader"

> understanding on how and when TEP should be created and how they are

Reviewer 6: NIT: change "when TEP" to "when a TEP"

managed across time.

Those are examples, and do not necessarily reflect what happened, or

> will happens on the particular subject they are about. They are here

Reviewer 6: NIT: Chnage "will happens" to "what will happen"

> to give more context and ideas on different situation that could rise

Reviewer 6: NIT: Change "situation" to "situations"
NIT: Change "could rise" to "could arise"

  - [PipelineResource re-design](#pipelineresource-re-design)
- [Drawbacks](#drawbacks)
- [Unresolved Questions](#unresolved-questions)
<!-- /toc -->

## Summary

A standardized development process for Tekton is proposed in order to

- provide a common structure and clear checkpoints for proposing
  changes to Tekton
- ensure that the motivation for a change is clear
- allow for the enumeration stability milestones and stability
  graduation criteria
- persist project information in a Version Control System (VCS) for
  future Tekton users and contributors
- support the creation of _high value user facing_ information such
  as:
  - an overall project development roadmap
  - motivation for impactful user facing changes
- ensure community participants are successfully able to drive changes
  to completion across one or more releases while stakeholders are
  adequately represented throughout the process

This process is supported by a unit of work called a Tekton
Enhancement Proposal (TEP). A TEP attempts to combine aspects of the
following:

- feature, and effort tracking document
- a product requirements document

> - design document

Reviewer 4: seems kinda weird that this says the TEP should contain the design doc and requirements, while below we say you may still need design docs (and i think design docs should contain information that the TEP may not, e.g. analysis of alternatives)

i feel like you could remove these bullet points without losing much info tho, maybe that's clearer?

Author: :thinking: It doesn't say it "should contain", it says "it combines" as you can see a TEP as "…" (the following bullet point)

> and i think design docs should contain information that the TEP may not, e.g. analysis of alternatives

Why would a TEP not include alternatives ? (or link to deeper analysis doc)

Reviewer 4: just ignore me, i meant to remove that part of the comment and forgot to get back to it - before i saw the template i didnt realize how much detail we were putting into the TEP and i definitely like including alternatives in the TEP, i think that's great! sorry for the confusion

into one file which is created incrementally in collaboration with one
or more [Working
Groups](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/master/working-groups.md)
(WGs).

This process does not block authors from doing early design docs using
any means. It does not block authors from sharing those design docs
with the community (during Working groups, on Slack, GitHub, …).

**This process acts as a requirement when a design docs is ready to be
implemented or integrated in the `tektoncd` projects**. In other words,
a change that impacts other `tektoncd` projects or users cannot be
merged if there is no `TEP` associated with it. Bug fixes and small
changes like refactoring that do not affect the APIs (CRDs, REST APIs)
are not concerned by this. Fixing the behaviour of a malfunctioning

> part of the project is also not concerned by this.

Reviewer 4: nit: instead of "also not concerned by this", maybe "does not require a TEP"?

This TEP process is related to
- the generation of an architectural roadmap
- the fact that the what constitutes a feature is still undefined
- issue management
- the difference between an accepted design and a proposal

> - the organization of design proposals

Reviewer 4: this is a total pet peeve but a bunch of these bullet point lists copied from k8s don't have the first letter capitalized and it looks weird. i totally understand if you want to ignore this feedback but I think the lists look better with the first letter capitalized.

Author: interesting :stuck_out_tongue_closed_eyes: I tend to think the opposite, or more accurately, if I don't see a dot — ending the sentence — I have trouble capitalizing :angel:

Reviewer 4: hah!

now that i think about it i think you might be right - i took a class once (where no one could ever get more than 85% on anything, another story) and i think the way you are capitalizing might be better 🤔 

i was hoping https://github.com/tektoncd/website/blob/master/content/en/doc-con-formatting.md would help but i guess that's too crazy specific XD maybe @sergetron can tell us what's right

Reviewer 8: The whole point of lists is that they're quickly scannable, and for that, they must be homogeneous.

The TL;DR is: keep the list item structure and grammar as homogeneous as possible, capitalize the first word of each item, and punctuate the ends as follows: 

* If most of your list items are single words or 2-3 word phrases that do not contain verbs, but one or two are not, rewrite the non-conforming ones to fit the rest and do not put periods at the end.

* If most of your list items contain verbs and/or are complete sentences, rewrite the non-conforming ones to fit the rest and then put a period at the end of each list.

More info here: https://developers.google.com/style/lists

Reviewer 8: PR: https://github.com/tektoncd/website/pull/139

Reviewer 4: bumping this, but not enough to block merging on!

the authors can assign a TEP number. No other changes should be put in
that PR so that it can be approved quickly and minimize merge
conflicts. The TEP number can also be done as part of the initial
submission if the PR is likely to be uncontested and merged quickly.

### Prior Art

The TEP process as proposed was essentially adapted from the
[Kubernetes KEP process][], which itself is essentially stolen from the [Rust RFC
process][] which itself seems to be very similar to the [Python PEP
process][]

[Rust RFC process]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs
[Kubernetes KEP process]: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps
[Python PEP process]: https://www.python.org/dev/peps/

## Examples

Let's give some example of workflow to give reader a better
understanding on how and when TEP should be created and how they are
managed across time.

Those are examples, and do not necessarily reflect what happened, or
will happens on the particular subject they are about. They are here
to give more context and ideas on different situation that could rise
while following the TEP process.

### Share Task and Pipeline as OCI artifact

> For more context, this is linked to the following:

Reviewer 4: im not sure what this sentence is trying to say, maybe "see the following for more context"?

- [Oci tool: makes use of oci-artifacts to store and retrieve Tekton resources](https://github.com/tektoncd/experimental/pull/461)

1. An initial design doc is crafted (let's imagine it is [Tekton OCI
Image
Catalog](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1zUVrIbGZh2R9dawKQ9Hm1Cx3GevKIfOcRO3fFLdmBDc/edit#heading=h.tp9mko2koenr)).
   An experimental project has already been created and a
   proof-of-concept demoed during a working group. The next step is to
   create a TEP (and continue work on the proof-of-concept if need be).
2. From this design docs, a TEP is created with the content of the
   design document.
3. It is approved with a `proposed` state, which means :
   - We acknowledge this is important for the project, and needs to be
     worked on
   - It needs some work and discussion based on the initial proposal
4. The TEP is being disscussed during Working Group(s) — it can be the
   main one, a specific one, the API Working Group.

   During those discussion it is clear that some work needs to be
   done:
   - Define a Spec for the OCI image (layers, metadata, configuration)
     The experimental project can be used to demo and validate that spec.

>    - Once the spec is agreed on

Reviewer 4: this bullet is kinda odd on its own, maybe the next one can be combined with it?

Author: Oh :scream_cat: The rest of the sentence might be missing :sweat:

5. The current TEP, defining the spec, is *approved* and marked as
   `implemented`. In this case `implemented` means it is available in
   the documentation in `tektoncd` (most likely on the
   `tektoncd/pipeline` repository)

We are now switching to the "Implementing Tekton Bundles" TEP.

1. It is proposed based on a design docs (discussed during working
   group)
2. It depends on the TEP on support for referencing Task and Pipeline
   to be approved and in the `implementable` (aka we have agreed on
   how it should be implemented more or less 😝).
   It is also agreed (and most likely written in the TEP) that
   "Implementing Tekton Bundle" would serve as the first
   implementation of this TEP.
3. The "Implementing Tekton Bundle" gets approved, and as it has been
   discussed during working groups, it is ready for implementation, so
   it gets merged directly into `implementable`.
4. Work is happening in `tektoncd/pipeline` (and `tektoncd/cli` in
   parallel) on implementing it.
5. Implementation is done, we update the TEP to put it in
   `implemented` state.

### PipelineResource re-design

For more context, this is linked to the PipelineResource work and more

> accurately the following:

Reviewer 4: im not sure what this sentence is getting at, similar to the previous section maybe this could be something like "here are some links for context"?
